Add new docs for high code app builder (#36183)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/actions/datadog_apps.md

Reviewer: [Global] Claude pointed out the naming conflict between the new high-code Datadog Apps and the Datadog Apps listed on the main App Builder page. For example, line 58 of https://docs-staging.datadoghq.com/esther/docs-13957-app-builder-high-code/actions/app_builder/ says "Datadog Apps function as native dashboard integrations."

Author: Good to know. I think this is fine since they both build Datadog Apps, but if product sees a lot of customer confusion, I can clarify.

---

> title: Datadog Apps

Reviewer 2: @estherk15 I consider remove the "Datadog" and call it only Apps since I see none of the other Datadog products have the word "Datadog" before. What do you think?

description: Build and deploy custom Datadog Apps locally using a code-based development workflow with React, backend functions, and a CLI.
site_support_id: app_builder #Site support banner for US1-FED and US2-FED
further_reading:
- link: "/actions/app_builder/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "App Builder"
- link: "/actions/app_builder/embedded_apps/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Embedded Apps"
- link: "/actions/app_builder/access_and_auth/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Access and Authentication"
---

## Overview

> With Datadog Apps, you build applications locally as code with React and TypeScript (or JavaScript), using your standard development workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With Apps, you build applications locally as code with React and TypeScript (or JavaScript), using your standard development workflow.
```

> Datadog Apps use the same [permissions model][1] as the drag-and-drop apps in App Builder and can also be [embedded in dashboards][2].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Datadog Apps use the same [permissions model][1] as App Builder apps and can also be embedded in other Datadog products such as [dashboards and IDPs][2].
```

> Choose Datadog Apps when you need:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Choose Apps when you need:
```

{{% collapse-content title="Example backend function" level="h4" expanded=false %}}

Create a backend function that lists hosts through the Action Catalog:

**src/listHosts.backend.ts**
```typescript
import { listHosts, type ListHostsResponse } from '@datadog/action-catalog/dd/hosts';

export async function getHosts(filter?: string): Promise<ListHostsResponse> {
    const response = await listHosts({
        inputs: {
            filter: filter ?? '*',
            count: 10,
            include_hosts_metadata: true,
        },
    });
    return response;
}
```

Then call it from your app's `App.tsx`:

**src/App.tsx**
```tsx
import { useState, useEffect } from 'react';
import { getHosts } from './listHosts.backend';

function App() {
    const [hostCount, setHostCount] = useState<number>(0);

    useEffect(() => {
        getHosts().then((response) => {
            setHostCount(response.host_list?.length ?? 0);
        });
    }, []);

    return (
        <div style={{ padding: '2rem', textAlign: 'center' }}>
            <h1>Welcome to my-app</h1>
            <p>Monitoring {hostCount} hosts</p>
        </div>
    );
}

export default App;
```
{{% /collapse-content %}}

> ## Publish your app

Reviewer 2: Isn't that called "Upload your app"? the user uploads their app from their local env to Datadog UI

| Variable | Description |
|---|---|
| `DD_API_KEY` | Datadog API key. |
| `DD_APP_KEY` | Datadog application key. |
| `DD_APPS_VERSION_NAME` | Optional. The version name for the uploaded app version. Must be a unique string per app. If unset, Datadog assigns a version name. |
| `DD_APPS_UPLOAD_ASSETS` | If set and `dryRun` is `false`, uploads built assets to Datadog when you run `npm run build`. |

By default, `npm run build` runs in dry run mode, which builds the app without uploading it to Datadog. Dry run mode is the recommended default for local development, where you typically don't want to upload every local build.

For production deployments, [set up CI/CD with GitHub Actions](#set-up-cicd-with-github-actions). [`DataDog/apps-github-action`][7] handles the upload step for you, so you don't need to change `dryRun` for this workflow.

To upload from your local environment as an end-to-end test (for example, to verify that the build pipeline works before a release), set `DD_APPS_UPLOAD_ASSETS`:

```shell
DD_APPS_UPLOAD_ASSETS=1 npm run build
```

After a successful upload, the build output displays a URL where your app is accessible in Datadog.

> ## View and manage your apps

Reviewer 2: I feel like this title should be "Publish and manage your apps"

After you publish an app, it appears in your [App Builder][8] app list alongside your other apps. From the App Builder UI, you can:

> - Edit the app name and description

Reviewer 2: We should either link to the app builder section that explains about how to edit the app name and description or just do it here (it should be short 1-2 lines)

> - Manage permissions

Reviewer 2: The first thing they should do here is to click on the "Publish button", only then they can manage the permissions. Also, same thing here, can we link to the section explaining about the permissions in App Builder (https://docs.datadoghq.com/actions/app_builder/access_and_auth/#app-permissions)?

> - Embed the app in dashboards, notebooks, and the Internal Developer Portal

Reviewer 2: Can you explain how to do it?

---
title: Datadog Apps

> description: Build and deploy custom Datadog apps locally using a code-based development workflow with React, backend functions, and a CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Build and deploy custom Datadog Apps locally using a code-based development workflow with React, backend functions, and a CLI.
```
Looks more consistent this way?

site_support_id: app_builder #Site support banner for US1-FED and US2-FED
further_reading:
- link: "/actions/app_builder/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "App Builder"
- link: "/actions/app_builder/embedded_apps/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Embedded Apps"
- link: "/actions/app_builder/access_and_auth/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Access and Authentication"
---

## Overview

> With Datadog Apps, you build applications locally as code with React and TypeScript (or JavaScript), using a standard development workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Datadog Apps, you build applications locally as code with React and TypeScript (or JavaScript), using your standard development workflow.
```

> Datadog Apps use the same permissions model as the [drag-and-drop apps in App Builder][1] and can also be [embedded in dashboards][2].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Datadog Apps use the same [permissions model][1] as the drag-and-drop apps in App Builder and can also be [embedded in dashboards][2].
```
Since the link goes to the App Builder auth page, the link text should take about permissions, not apps.

Choose Datadog Apps when you need:

- **Team collaboration**: multiple engineers contributing to the same app, with code review and version history through your existing source control
- **Source control and CI/CD**: store your app in GitHub and deploy automatically on merge
- **AI-assisted development**: use your preferred local tooling (such as Claude) to generate and refine code
- **Custom cloud providers and APIs**: integrate with services beyond the [Action Catalog][3] using your own backend code

> - **Complex UI and logic**: full React and TypeScript control over components, state, and rendering

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Team collaboration**: Multiple engineers contributing to the same app, with code review and version history through your existing source control.
- **Source control and CI/CD**: Store your app in GitHub and deploy automatically on merge.
- **AI-assisted development**: Use your preferred local tooling (such as Claude) to generate and refine code.
- **Custom cloud providers and APIs**: Integrate with services beyond the [Action Catalog][3] using your own backend code.
- **Complex UI and logic**: Full React and TypeScript control over components, state, and rendering.
```

## Prerequisites

> - **Node.js version v20.12.0 or later**. Check your version:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Node.js version 20.12.0 or later**. Check your version:
```

  ```shell
  node --version
  ```

> - A Datadog **API key** and an **Application key** with Actions API Access enabled. For instructions on creating keys, see [API and Application Keys][4].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Datadog **API key** and an **application key** with Actions API Access enabled. For instructions on creating keys, see [API and Application Keys][4].
```

  To enable Actions API Access on an application key:

  1. Navigate to [**Organization Settings > Application Keys**][5].
  1. Select your application key.
  1. Enable **Actions API Access**.

## Scaffold an app

1. Run the scaffolding command to create a new app:

   ```shell
   npm create @datadog/apps
   ```

2. Follow the interactive prompts to configure your app name and template.

> 3. (Optional) Set up the RUM integration for the app. This automatically sets up the Browser SDK to set up the following:

Reviewer: Can you link to the RUM integration or otherwise define it more?

Author: ```suggestion
3. (Optional) Set up Datadog RUM for the app. This automatically sets up the Browser SDK for:
```

- RUM tracking
- Error Tracking
- Build metrics

> ### App structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Generated app structure
```

The scaffolded project includes:

| File or directory | Description |
|---|---|
| `src/App.tsx` | Root UI component (React) |
| `src/**/*.backend.ts` | Backend functions that run server-side with access to API keys |
| `vite.config.ts` | Build configuration with [`@datadog/vite-plugin`][14] pre-configured |
| `package.json` | Dependencies and scripts (`dev`, `build`) |

## Develop your app locally

1. Set your Datadog credentials as environment variables:

   ```shell
   export DD_API_KEY="<YOUR_API_KEY>"
   export DD_APP_KEY="<YOUR_APPLICATION_KEY>"
   ```

2. Start the development server:

   ```shell
   npm run dev
   ```

3. Open the URL shown in the terminal (`http://localhost:5173/`) to preview your app.

### Backend functions

> Files matching `*.backend.ts` or `.js` contain backend functions. These run server-side with access to your API keys and are never shipped to the browser. The frontend imports and calls them like standard ES modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Files matching `*.backend.ts` or `*.js` contain backend functions. Backend functions run server-side with access to your API keys and are never shipped to the browser. The frontend imports and calls them like standard ES modules.
```
This suggestion assumes the pattern is "\*.js", not "\*.backend.js"

> Backend functions can call any action in Datadog's [Actions Catalog][3] through the [`@datadog/action-catalog`][6] library. The Actions Catalog provides reusable, pre-built actions for interacting with cloud providers, SaaS tools, and the Datadog API, so you can build functionality on top of existing integrations instead of writing API clients from scratch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Backend functions can call any action in Datadog's [Action Catalog][3] through the [`@datadog/action-catalog`][6] library. The Action Catalog provides reusable, pre-built actions for interacting with cloud providers, SaaS tools, and the Datadog API, so you can build functionality on top of existing integrations instead of writing API clients from scratch.
```

import { getHosts } from './listHosts.backend';

function App() {
    const [hostCount, setHostCount] = useState<number>(0);

    useEffect(() => {
        getHosts().then((response) => {
            setHostCount(response.host_list?.length ?? 0);
        });
    }, []);

    return (
        <div style={{ padding: '2rem', textAlign: 'center' }}>
            <h1>Welcome to my-app</h1>
            <p>Monitoring {hostCount} hosts</p>
        </div>
    );
}

export default App;
```
{{% /collapse-content %}}

## Publish your app

Run a production build to upload your app to Datadog:

```shell
npm run build
```

The following environment variables are available with `npm run build`:

| Variable | Description |
|---|---|
| `DD_API_KEY` | Datadog API key. |
| `DD_APP_KEY` | Datadog application key. |
| `DD_APPS_VERSION_NAME` | Optional. The version name of the app version to be uploaded. Can be any string, but each app version must have a unique name (not duplicated for the same app). If unset, Datadog assigns a version name. |
| `DD_APPS_UPLOAD_ASSETS` | If set and `dryRun` is `false`, uploads built assets to Datadog when `npm run build` is run. |

> By default, `npm run build` runs in dry run mode, which builds the app without uploading it to Datadog. This is the recommended default for local development, since you typically don't want every local build to publish.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, `npm run build` runs in dry run mode, which builds the app without uploading it to Datadog. Dry run mode is the recommended default for local development, where you typically don't want to upload every local build.
```

For production deployments, [set up CI/CD with GitHub Actions](#set-up-cicd-with-github-actions). [`DataDog/apps-github-action`][7] handles the upload step on your behalf, so you don't need to change `dryRun` for this workflow.

> To upload from your local environment as an end-to-end test — for example, to verify that the build pipeline works before a release — set `DD_APPS_UPLOAD_ASSETS`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To upload from your local environment as an end-to-end test (for example, to verify that the build pipeline works before a release), set `DD_APPS_UPLOAD_ASSETS`:
```

```shell
DD_APPS_UPLOAD_ASSETS=1 npm run build
```

After a successful upload, the build output displays a URL where your app is accessible in Datadog.

## View and manage your apps

After you publish an app, it appears in your [App Builder][8] app list alongside your other apps. From the App Builder UI, you can:

- Edit the app name and description
- Manage permissions
- Embed the app in dashboards, notebooks, and the Internal Developer Portal

<div class="alert alert-danger">
Apps built locally cannot be edited through the App Builder drag-and-drop interface. The following App Builder features are not available for locally-built apps:
<ul>
<li>UI editing with drag-and-drop components</li>
<li>Variables, events, and expressions managed in the App Builder UI</li>
</ul>
To change an app's UI or logic, update the code in your local project and redeploy.
</div>

## Set up CI/CD with GitHub Actions

> To automatically deploy your app on every push to the `main` branch, use the [`DataDog/apps-github-action`][7] GitHub Action. This action builds your app and deploys it to Datadog. For all available inputs and configuration options, see the [action's README][7].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To automatically deploy your app on every push to the `main` branch, use the [`DataDog/apps-github-action`][7] GitHub Action. This action builds your app and deploys it to Datadog. See the README for available inputs and configuration options.
```
Pointing to the same link target twice in a paragraph is awkward.

> **If your organization is not on US1** (`datadoghq.com`), set `auth.site` in `vite.config.ts` to your [Datadog site][9]. The build reads this configuration when uploading the app, so the same setting also applies to local development. Your Datadog site: (`{{< region-param key="dd_site" >}}`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**If your organization is not on US1** (`datadoghq.com`), set `auth.site` in `vite.config.ts` to your [Datadog site][9]. The build reads this configuration when uploading the app, so the same setting also applies to local development. Your Datadog site is  `{{< region-param key="dd_site" >}}`.
```

{{< site-region region="us3,us5,eu,ap1,ap2" >}}

```ts
datadogVitePlugin({
  auth: {
    site: '<YOUR_DATADOG_SITE>',
  },
});
```
{{< /site-region >}}

Create `.github/workflows/cd.yml` in your app's repository:

```yaml
name: Continuous Deployment
on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main

permissions:
  contents: read

jobs:
  deploy-app:
    name: Deploy Datadog App
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    permissions:
      contents: read
      id-token: write

    steps:
      - name: Checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v6

      - name: Setup Node.js
        uses: actions/setup-node@v6

      - name: Deploy
        uses: DataDog/apps-github-action@v0.0.1
        with:
          datadog-api-key: ${{ secrets.DATADOG_API_KEY }}
          datadog-app-key: ${{ secrets.DATADOG_APP_KEY }}
          app-directory: .
```

## Troubleshooting

> ### 401 or "Missing authentication token" errors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 401 or `Missing authentication token` errors
```

---
title: Datadog Apps
description: Build and deploy custom Datadog apps locally using a code-based development workflow with React, backend functions, and a CLI.
site_support_id: app_builder #Site support banner for US1-FED and US2-FED
further_reading:
- link: "/actions/app_builder/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "App Builder"
- link: "/actions/app_builder/embedded_apps/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Embedded Apps"
- link: "/actions/app_builder/access_and_auth/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Access and Authentication"
---

## Overview

> With Datadog Apps, you build applications locally as code with React and TypeScript (or JavaScript), using a standard frontend development workflow.

Reviewer 3: I'd not mention `frontend` here, since we support backend functions this could be misleading.

```suggestion
With Datadog Apps, you build applications locally as code with React and TypeScript (or JavaScript), using a standard development workflow.
```

- **Source control and CI/CD**: store your app in GitHub and deploy automatically on merge
- **AI-assisted development**: use your preferred local tooling (such as Claude) to generate and refine code
- **Custom cloud providers and APIs**: integrate with services beyond the [Action Catalog][3] using your own backend code
- **Complex UI and logic**: full React and TypeScript control over components, state, and rendering

## Prerequisites

- **Node.js version v20.12.0 or later**. Check your version:
  ```shell
  node --version
  ```
- A Datadog **API key** and an **Application key** with Actions API Access enabled. For instructions on creating keys, see [API and Application Keys][4].

  To enable Actions API Access on an application key:

  1. Navigate to [**Organization Settings > Application Keys**][5].
  1. Select your application key.
  1. Enable **Actions API Access**.

## Scaffold an app

1. Run the scaffolding command to create a new app:

   ```shell
   npm create @datadog/apps
   ```

2. Follow the interactive prompts to configure your app name and template.

> 3. (Optional) Set up the RUM integration for the app. This automatically sets up the Browser SDK so you can use RUM to report user metrics.

Reviewer 3: Maybe I'd add this as a sub items list instead, mentioning that the scaffolding command will setup all three:
- RUM tracking
- Error Tracking
- Build metrics

Otherwise, we're overlooking the Error Tracking and build metrics integrations.

Author: ```suggestion
3. (Optional) Set up the RUM integration for the app. This automatically sets up the Browser SDK to set up the following:
- RUM tracking
- Error Tracking
- Build metrics
```

### App structure

The scaffolded project includes:

| File or directory | Description |
|---|---|
| `src/App.tsx` | Root UI component (React) |
| `src/**/*.backend.ts` | Backend functions that run server-side with access to API keys |

> | `vite.config.ts` | Build configuration with `@datadog/vite-plugin` pre-configured |

Reviewer 3: `@datadog/vite-plugin` should link to https://github.com/DataDog/build-plugin or https://www.npmjs.com/package/@datadog/vite-plugin

Author: ```suggestion
| `vite.config.ts` | Build configuration with [`@datadog/vite-plugin`][14] pre-configured |
```

            setHostCount(response.host_list?.length ?? 0);
        });
    }, []);

    return (
        <div style={{ padding: '2rem', textAlign: 'center' }}>
            <h1>Welcome to my-app</h1>
            <p>Monitoring {hostCount} hosts</p>
        </div>
    );
}

export default App;
```
{{% /collapse-content %}}

## Publish your app

Run a production build to upload your app to Datadog:

```shell
npm run build
```

The following environment variables are available with `npm run build`:

| Variable | Description |
|---|---|
| `DD_API_KEY` | Datadog API key. |
| `DD_APP_KEY` | Datadog application key. |
| `DD_APPS_VERSION_NAME` | Optional. The version name of the app version to be uploaded. Can be any string, but each app version must have a unique name (not duplicated for the same app). If unset, Datadog assigns a version name. |
| `DD_APPS_UPLOAD_ASSETS` | If set and `dryRun` is `false`, uploads built assets to Datadog when `npm run build` is run. |

By default, `npm run build` runs in dry run mode, which builds the app without uploading it to Datadog. This is the recommended default for local development, since you typically don't want every local build to publish.

> For production deployments, [set up CI/CD with GitHub Actions](#set-up-cicd-with-github-actions). The [`DataDog/apps-github-action`][7] handles the upload step on your behalf, so you don't need to change `dryRun` for this workflow.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For production deployments, [set up CI/CD with GitHub Actions](#set-up-cicd-with-github-actions). [`DataDog/apps-github-action`][7] handles the upload step on your behalf, so you don't need to change `dryRun` for this workflow.
```

To upload from your local environment as an end-to-end test — for example, to verify that the build pipeline works before a release — set `DD_APPS_UPLOAD_ASSETS`:

```shell
DD_APPS_UPLOAD_ASSETS=1 npm run build
```

> If you run your own deployment pipeline without the official GitHub Action, set `dryRun` to `false` in `vite.config.ts` so every build uploads:

Reviewer 4: I think it's better for them to specify the `DD_APPS_UPLOAD_ASSETS` environmental variable instead to avoid a developer accidentally publishing

```js
apps: {
    enable: true,
    dryRun: false,
},

> ```

Author: @oliverli We can remove this altogether and force the recommended ENV variable route.

```suggestion
```

### Backend function calls fail

Check that both `DD_API_KEY` and `DD_APP_KEY` are set and that the application key has Actions API Access enabled.

### Build succeeds but nothing uploads

The build defaults to dry run mode. Set `DD_APPS_UPLOAD_ASSETS=1` or configure `dryRun: false` in `vite.config.ts`.

### Node.js version errors during scaffolding

The scaffolding tool requires Node.js v20.12.0 or later. If you still encounter version errors on a supported version, try upgrading to v22. Use a version manager such as [nvm][10], [Volta][11], or [fnm][12], or download from [nodejs.org][13].

## Further reading

{{< partial name="whats-next/whats-next.html" >}}

[1]: /actions/app_builder/access_and_auth/
[2]: /actions/app_builder/embedded_apps/
[3]: /actions/actions_catalog/
[4]: /account_management/api-app-keys/
[5]: https://app.datadoghq.com/organization-settings/application-keys
[6]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/@datadog/action-catalog
[7]: https://github.com/DataDog/apps-github-action
[8]: /actions/app_builder/
[9]: /getting_started/site/
[10]: https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm
[11]: https://volta.sh
[12]: https://github.com/Schniz/fnm

> [13]: https://nodejs.org

Author: ```suggestion
[13]: https://nodejs.org
[14]: https://github.com/DataDog/build-plugin
```
